---
title: "Stream I/O"
date: 2018-07-19
header:
  image: "/images/C++ wallpaper.jpg"
exerpt: C++
---




## Intro to streams

In C++, iostream library allows you to input and output data using << and >> operators.
There are 3 kinds of objects in the <iostream> library - cin, cout, and cerr(outputs error messages).


istream and ostream are not classes in their own right. 
Rather, they are typedefs that represent character-based instantiations of the basic_istream and basic_ostream template classes respectively.  
both cin and cout(not sure about cerr) use namespace std. So the basic form is like std::cin and std::cout. There is also a newline operator, std:: endl.


## Inputting and outputting strings

Even string needs to be used with namespace std; so if we don't include using namespace std; at the very top, we gotta use std::string all the time.
We can use cout as it was before, but if the string that we want to input includes any whitespace character(spacebar) in it, we should use the **std::getline()** function instead.
This function takes 2 parameters:  

- The input stream, from which we want to get the input
- The std::string object, into which you want to store the value

So for example, the code can be like this:

```c++
    std::string name;
    std::cout << "Full name: ";
    std::getline(std::cin, name);
    
    std::string address;
    std::cout << "Full address: ";
    std::getline(std::cin, address);
    
    std::cout 
        << name << std::endl
        << address << std::endl;
```


## Extending streams to support custom classes

The i/ostream classes do not have any inherent support for our own custom classes.
We can easily define custom operator >> and << to support stream input/output for custom classes.

Let's say we want to extend stream classes to support pointers.

First make a class point.

```c++
    class point
    {
    public:
        int x, y;
    
        // Plus other members, as appropriate.
    };
 ```
 
 Given this class, define a custom operator >> function as follows:
 
 ```c++
     std::istream & operator >> (std::istream & is, point & p)
    {
        is >> p.x >> p.y;
        return is;
    }
 ```
 
 The function must receive 2 parameters - first one being a std::istream reference and second one being a point reference.
 
 In a similar way, let's define a custom operator << function.
 
 ```c++
     std::ostream & operator << (std::ostream & os, const point & p)
    {
        os << "[" << p.x << "," << p.y << "]";
        return os;
    }
 ```
 
 All conditions same as >> one. Inside the function, we use the ostream and format it [x, y].
 
 ```c++
     std::cout
    << "Here are your points..." << std::endl
    << p1 << std::endl
    << p2 << std::endl;
 ```
 
 
 ## Major manipulators
 
 We can format the way output is displayed on a stream. For example, we can specify the minimum width or whether the value should be left or right aligned. We use manipulators. std::endl is one of them.
 
 1. **std:: flush** tells the stream to flush its internal buffer to the physical device immediately. This is useful because we can display debugging info before the program might crash later on. This is defined in the <iostream> header file.
 
 2. **std:: setw(number)** sets the minimum field width for the next value displayed on the stream. The string with setw(10) is right-aligned, making total character including whitespaces of 10. If the number of characters in the string is bigger than the number in the parameter of setw(), the output just comes out ignoring setw function. There is no truncation. This one is defined in the <iomanip> header file(as well as in <iostream>). *Quick note, all of the manipulators that require parameters are defined in <iomanip> header file.* 
  
 3. **std:: setprecision(number)** sets how many digits would be included in output. This manipulator applies to all subsequent outputs.

 4. **std:: left**, **std:: right** takes control of justification, making left-aligned and right-aligned each. Also, **std:: internal** justifies the + or - sign to be left-aligned and numeric values to be right-justified within the field width. *All 3 of them apply to all subsequent outputs. Once you write this code, all the codes below are affected.*
 
 5. 3 ways to format floating-point values:
    (1) fixed format: always displays a number, a decimal point, and a fraction part, no scientific format  
    (2) scientific format: always uses scientific format such as 1.23e5  
    (3) general format(default): uses fixed format if the number is not too big or small, otherwise uses scientific format.  

*All 3 of them apply to subsequent outputs. Once you write this code, all the codes below are affected.*
   
 ```c++
    double pi = 3.14159265358979;
    std::cout << std::fixed << pi << std::endl;                   // fixed
    std::cout << std::scientific << pi << std::endl;              // scientific
    std::cout.unsetf(std::ios::fixed | std::ios::scientific);     // return to form of general
 ```
 
 
 ## Miscellaneous manipulators
 
 There are other manipulators such as std::showpos, std::noshowpos, std::64, std::oct, std::hex, std::dec, std::showbase, std::noshowbase, std::uppercase, std::nouppercase.
